This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson, and the subject of this
show will be First Contact. For over a century, at least since H.G. Wells' War
of the Worlds, contact with aliens has been one of the standard motifs of
science fiction, and certainly one of the most popular. There are, of course, a
number of possibilities coming under the heading of alien contact. The aliens
may be superior, we may be superior, or there may be equality. The aliens might
be friendly, hostile, or indifferent. One of the most popular and fascinating
possibilities of all is the story of First Contact, one in which the first
meeting between humans and aliens is treated. Our present show will be the first
of two on the subject of First Contact.
Of course, Wells started the tradition of the alien being both physically
repulsive and hostile to human beings. And the pulp magazines picked it up
through the late 20s and the early 30s into the 40s. The characteristic way of
treating an alien was as a so-called bug-eyed monster. Then the movies picked it
up and carried that on through the 50s, and meantime, the literature took a
different trend.
In the 30s, around 1934, Stanley Weinbaum published a story which was one of the
landmarks in science fiction literature. It was entitled The Modern Martian
Odyssey, and it was the first treatment in the modern period of aliens as
sensitive creatures, ones who were not hostile or aggressive, who had an
environment and ecology of their own. It took place on Mars, and Weinbaum
created three or four different types of aliens on the planet. And it's
interesting for us to go back and read about those aliens because they were all
based on the science of his day. For instance, one of them was a silicon
creature. They figured Mars was made up of sand, so one of the aliens that
Weinbaum developed for the planet was one who ate sand. This is quite possible.
There are two kinds of chemicals that can support life, and carbon and silicon
are the two. We're carbon-based, and silicon life is possible. And as Asimov
pointed out with Weinbaum, he said he was the first one in the history of
science fiction to develop an environment for an alien, conceiving of him as
having come from a non-Earth environment, as being part of an ecology which was
non-human, having thought processes which were non-human, having a logical
system which was non-human. And Weinbaum, of course, also made one of his
aliens, anyhow, a creature named Tweel, very friendly, a non-hostile, non
-aggressive alien, which was very different from the bug-eyed monster tradition,
and it went over very well. Weinbaum was in his late 20s when that story was
published, and there was an immediate market and immediate imitators doing that
kind of story, an alien who was non-aggressive, with whom contact could be
established. And as I said, that was in 1934, in Wonder Stories, when Weinbaum
wrote that landmark story.
There are several different kinds of first contact, and we're going to be
talking about most of them in this treatment, one of that being mankind's first
encounter with alien beings. Are mankind and several brother alien races coming
in contact with a new alien race? Yeah, I think that has to be the criterion,
that no matter how many aliens have been contacted, there still is that special
feeling about meeting up with a brand new alien culture, and the humans have to
be involved with it, of course, no matter if they're along with other aliens or
not. I think that has to be the main criterion of alien contact. Of course, the
meeting up with the race, the original, the first race, is the most exciting and
most important
one, because up until that time, the human race doesn't even know whether there
are other races in existence, presumably. After one has been in existence, then
the rest, you kind of assume, are going to be there. Usually, a first contact
story will be very much tied to its particular culture or historical era. Today,
for instance, we're very much tied up with more sophisticated approaches or more
sophisticated environments for it, simply because we are expecting it to happen.
But way back in the 30s and 40s, not long after the days of the bug-eyed monster
motifs, many of the stories about first contact would be tied to what was
happening in the world. For instance, wars, racial aggressions, and so forth.
After all, another race is alien.
Xenophobia or hatred of strangers, for instance, can take place within the human
race, not just with alien creatures. And probably one of the best first contact
stories of all, by Murray Leinster, entitled, Appropriately Enough First
Contact, a spaceship meets up with another, well, a spaceship from Earth, meets
up with a spaceship from another culture, the first time that any kind of alien
has ever been contacted. And one of the things that happens in the story, before
they actually meet, the humans on their ship are discussing and worrying and
wondering about what kinds of creatures are going to meet. And Leinster has one
of the characters say this, what are we going to do about them? Maybe these
creatures will be aesthetic marvels, nice and friendly and polite, and
underneath with the sneaking, brutal ferocity of a Japanese. Now, you obviously
know that was written during the middle 40s, during the Second World War, when
the Japanese were our enemy. But you'll find that often to be a motif of the
first contact story. But if I remember, that story did have a happy ending. They
did, they did, Leinster speculated that perhaps there would be friendliness
between the two cultures. The way he did that was fairly clever, though. Wasn't
that the case in which the two different crews actually switched spaceships, so
they went back to each other's planets in each other's spaceships and avoided
revealing too much about themselves that way? Yeah. That's one of the problems
you'll meet in many first contact stories, that we don't want them to know where
we are. And presumably, they wouldn't want us to know where they are. And so one
particular branch of the first contact story is when the two cultures, the
humans and the aliens, meet somewhere in a neutral space. And the whole subject
of that first contact story was the aliens and the humans were wondering how can
we keep them from knowing where we come from. Another way an author might
introduce a first contact story would be in the way that Hal Clement designed
his story, Needle, written in 1950. That being that it's a first contact story
in reverse. It's the story of an alien making first contact with people on
Earth. And the alien in this particular story is his form is alien, but his
feelings, his motives, his emotions are very much human. Therefore, the reader
is able to empathize with him and his plight. The alien is more or less a
detective, and he is chasing a criminal. And the alien's form is a small
gelatinous mass. And they work in a parasitic relationship with a host. And
that's how the contact is made. The alien hero inhabits the body of a young man,
and they, through various methods, are able to contact and communicate with each
other. And then they go off in search of the criminal and eventually find and
dispose of him. You think that's fair? You said that the alien was, more or less
had human feelings. You mentioned the fact he was chasing a criminal. To me, a
good first contact story, a good story about aliens, must have a credible alien.
Surely, some creature developing on another planet, another galaxy, would have a
whole system of logic, a whole feelings, if they had feelings at all, that were
totally non-human. In fact, it probably would be very difficult to understand
him from the basis of our psychology. The trouble is, it's much easier for a
writer to create, say, a bug-eyed monster, than to try and create an alien and
his whole ecology and his whole society simultaneously, and make it incredibly
different from human society. It's a tough thing, because we're all humans.
Well, I think the early presentation of the aliens, you know, what we would call
unsophisticated, I think they almost had to do that. I mean, an alien was
usually something that looked weird, but felt like a human being. Right. And
quite often, they emphasized physical or physiological characteristics. He's
alien because he's got five arms and three heads and so forth, and they didn't
consider things like his psychology. Later on, this became a little bit more
evident. In fact, a lot of different parts of human culture were considered in
the first contact stories. For example, even religion, in the case of James
Blish's case of conscience, in which an entire planet, according to what Blish
is trying to make us believe, has been created by the adversary, by Satan, and
the aliens on this, reptilian though they may be, are perfect creatures who have
not, evidently have not been involved in original sin. They're still living in,
essentially, a Garden of Eden sort of thing. And the reaction of the human
protagonist to this is the focus of the novel. The aliens on the planet were
reptilian or like small dinosaurs. They were like, they were like a race of
Vulcans, Mr. Spock's from Star Trek, in that they used pure reason. That's one
of the things that bothered the protagonist, the Jesuit priest, is that they had
a perfect society, a perfect culture, yet they had no such thing as faith, no
such thing as religion, in fact, no emotions. Right. They went totally
unreasoned, and they had a perfect culture. Yes. And to the priest, that shook
the very foundations of his faith, because to have religion, to have faith, you
have to have faith. And these creatures did not know what that was. Right. So it
was a crisis of conscience for him. The ending of that novel, you might
remember, was very ambiguous. I think Blish intended for that to be so. Yes. The
planet was created out of an element, lithium, I believe, that was inherently
unstable. And when an Earthman landed on the planet, or started to set up
factories of a certain kind on the planet to use this lithium ore, either he
caused the planet to disintegrate or to blow up, or the priest, at the end of
the novel, exercises the planet and it disappears. And you are now told which
actually was effective in the destruction of the alien race. Some readers might
find that novel a bit slow, but I think it's a fascinating treatment. And
probably, I would say, more than 90% of the first contact stories and novels
that have been written, I think it's probably truer to some of the feelings that
the human race will have when we actually do make first contact. I think one of
the first problems the human race will have is, are these creatures created by
God? Do they have souls? Given the fact they have intelligence, yet do they have
souls? I think it's very easy here to see an analogy between the explorers of
the old world, the Spanish particularly, when they came to the new world and
discovered the Indian cultures. They had philosophical, theological debates on
whether these creatures, these Indians, had souls. They could kill them and say,
well, there's nothing wrong with this, they're animals, they don't have souls. I
think we're going to have that problem when we do run across aliens. It's going
to be a religious problem. And I think Blish's book, A Case of Conscience, is
probably the, well, is the classic treatment of that particular aspect of first
contact. Another value or another insight that a first contact story can give
people is to put a perspective on the human race. Of course, we think of
ourselves usually as the center of the universe. We think of ourselves as being
the most intelligent creatures, at least on this planet, if not in the universe
or the galaxy. And there are a number of first contact stories in which we learn
humility. One of the best, I think, is Gordon R. Dickson's Dolphin's Way,
published in the mid-60s. John Varley's universe, a good part of it, or the
background in many of his books, comes from a similar idea. A group of, a race
of super powerful invading beings has taken over the Earth and has decided to
contact the most intelligent species, which in this case are dolphins and killer
whales. In fact, we learn at one point in one of his novels that the invaders
classify human intelligence or classify terrestrial intelligences on three
levels. There are the intelligent ones, which are dolphins and killer whales.
There are hive minds or levels
in which groups of species can work together, like an ant colony or a termite
colony, and he groups human beings along with these. Human beings are not
intelligent individually, according to this classification. And on the third
level are animals, and that's a very humiliating thing. The invaders wipe out
civilization on the Earth completely, human civilization anyway, without even
stopping to worry about it. And they don't even contact human beings. Usually in
most of these first contact stories, even if the contact is negative, that is
the humans are made into an inferior race or are shown as an inferior race
compared to the aliens, at least there are some kind of communication
possibilities. In truth, it might be the case that an alien would be so
different from human beings we wouldn't even be able to communicate with them.
Their psychologies would be so different that we'd have no common meeting
ground. Or the technology on both sides, or the lack of it may be such that
there could be no medium for communication. Yes, their technology may be so far
ahead of ours that we don't even think the same as they do. I think one of the
more interesting treatments in first contact would be Stanislaw Lem's Solaris,
in that mankind has found a planet orbiting around a binary star system, but the
planet's orbit is stable, which would be impossible. So they go to the planet to
investigate why this planet's orbit is stable and find out that the ocean on
this planet, which comprises most of the planets except for a few islands, is
sentient or intelligent. So they set up stations and start trying to communicate
with the planet, and therein lies the crux of the story. The hero, Kris Kelvin,
has landed on a space station orbiting Solaris and it has a few members of the
crew left alive, a Dr. Snow and a Dr. Satorius. They both are in essence hiding
out in certain parts of the ship and staying closed away from each other and
Kelvin has the responsibility or the obligation of finding out why all this is
going on. During the early part of Kelvin's stay on the space station, his dead
wife, Rheya, is materialized on board the ship by the ocean Solaris. he is
immediately horrified and finds a way to get rid of his first wife by sending
her off in a ship. And about a day or two after that happens, his wife is
rematerialized on the ship. This time, her body is not composed of atoms and
molecules the way we know them. It's composed of neutrinos being extremely
dense. But aside from that makeup of her form, she is totally human in every
respect and is deeply in love with him. His wife had committed suicide
previously because Kelvin had left her and she in essence died of loneliness.
There ensues a type of morality play in which Kelvin tries to deduce why his
wife has materialized at this particular time and space.
And there's several levels to the story at this point in which Kelvin is trying
to figure out why she got there, how she got there, why all this is happening at
this particular point in time. And he finally deduces that it was the ocean
which materialized his wife because his wife has knowledge which she would not
have normally had she been a living person and entity. She had knowledge of
Kelvin's, some of his innermost thoughts which he had kept secret from his wife.
while she was alive. And in the end of the story
even though Kelvin can communicate with the creation of Solaris he cannot
communicate with Solaris itself. The concepts, the thought processes, our
emotions if there are any of this being which is literally an ocean on this
entire planet are so far are so far from that of human emotions or thought
processes that there can be no direct contact and the enigma of Solaris at the
beginning of the book is left the same at the end of the book. You'd probably
call that a thought novel wouldn't you more or less on the. It's very much I
would call psychological science fiction. Yeah, psychological but it's not so
much the action the typical hero or heroine but the
possibilities. Yeah, the psychological interplay between the two cultures and so
forth.
One of the more intelligently written first contact stories to come out recently
was The Mote in God's Eye by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle and Keith Johnson has a
critique on that book. Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle have collaborated on several
works The Mote in God's Eye is perhaps their most successful effort It is a
return to the bug-eyed monster theme but with some significant differences from
the usual treatments The plot is an exciting and complex one so much so that the
reader will probably not pick up every twist upon the first reading The action
takes place in the future history that has been constructed by Pournelle Mankind
has spread out among the stars He has started wars and built up empires and at
the time of Mote has begun rebuilding a new empire from the ashes of the most
recent galaxy-wide conflict But then the monster arrives. She is not recognized
as a monster upon arrival. Not until books end do the protagonists realize that
this totally alien species that they have met is the deadly enemy of all humans.
This terrible secret is revealed gradually piece by piece to the reader in a
very Hitchcockian way. That first alien visitor has come into human space on the
wings of a solar sail after a very long journey. Human beings do not learn a
great deal from the creature, however largely because she is dead by the time
they pick her up. So the empire decides to send a scientific and military
expedition to the planet inhabited by the alien race. The expedition is
commandeered by a character who is a cross between George Patton and Nikita
Khrushchev. His characterization provokes some humor in places. The captain of a
second ship Rod Blaine is the real hero, however and he undergoes some unusual
and suspenseful adventures. His crew meets the aliens talks with them studies
them and becomes rather friendly with them. In fact, before too long the captain
finds his ship overrun with aliens Very small ones. You see, the aliens come in
several versions. There are administrators and ambassador types. There are strong
stupid farmers and small dexterous doctors. These are not simply different
occupations. They are completely separate subspecies of the alien race. On Earth,
the situation would be similar if gorillas had evolved a low level of human
intelligence and become farmers, orangutans had become electrical engineers, and
chimpanzees had become jet pilots. We humans, of course would be the
administrators or perhaps we would be professional warriors. This is one of the
aliens' deadly secret. One of their forms is made up of a powerful vicious set
of super soldiers who could make the alien equivalent of mincemeat out of any
human military man. But there is a more terrible fact concealed by the aliens and
that is overpopulation. Every alien must be made pregnant periodically or she
will die. This has, of course, led to terrible overcrowding on the planet. So much
so that periodically civilization has blasted itself back to savagery. The planet
has gone through thousands of these cycles of growth and catastrophe. That
pattern has imbued the race with a deep frustrating fatalism a sense of futility
that makes their psychology very different from that of us humans. At one point a
crew member who has stumbled across the secret exclaims to one of the creatures.
But man, there's got to be a way to solve this. To which the alien replies I am
not a man and there doesn't got to be a way. And that's another reason I don't
want contact between your species and mine. You're all crazy. You think every
problem has a solution. The action is fast throughout the novel. The crew of
Captain Blaine's ship have interesting adventures with the friendly aliens. Three
of his crewmen are unknowingly abandoned on the planet and have some hair
-raising adventures with unfriendly aliens ending in their deaths. The
unsuspecting expedition returns home. They even bring three of the beings with
them. But in true space opera fashion the heroes uncover the truth by means of
their human cleverness and isolate the aliens in their home system. And the novel
ends as do many of Niven's works somewhat inconclusively. The book offers several
fascinating new concepts and more than a few contrasting features. Perhaps these
are a result of the dual authorship. The empire is dreadfully old-fashioned. It is
modeled after a 15th century monarchy with its hierarchical structure. Women are
worshipped in a way that must have set Ursula Le Guin's teeth on edge. There is a
distinct flavor of space opera in the action. Yet there are some recent social
issues incorporated in the book. The overpopulation problem of the aliens is
probably Niven's idea of the dangers that face human society before the end of
the century today. Again, the aliens are old-fashioned monsters even if nobody
realizes it at first We are led to understand why they are monstrous however
almost to the point of sympathizing with them One of the most difficult tasks in
the writing of science fiction is the construction of a truly alien being.
Pournelle and Niven have done an admirable job. The novel is not without flaws.
Human society is depressingly similar to today's version of it. And there are
some funny anachronisms which I suspect my colleagues will bring up in a few
moments. But for imaginative invention and excitement The Mote in God's Eye will
fit on anyone's bookshelf.
Niven and Pournelle have done something very interesting in that book. Earlier we
had all of us recognized and mentioned that there's been an increase in
sophistication from the early treatment of aliens as bug-eyed monsters into
evolving through a wine bomb story where they are friendly and non-aggressive.
This in a sense is a return to the bug-eyed monster. They don't look like bug
-eyed monsters. In fact some of the humans if I remember almost want to pet them
because they have soft fur in their bodies. But on the other hand their exterior
appearance belies a very hostile intention toward humans. So in a sense this is
going backwards. Another interesting fact or sophisticated or clever thing that
Niven and Pournelle have done in the book is the levels of comparative
intelligence between the humans and the Moties as I believe they're Moties in the
book because they come from the Mote When you come right down to it the Moties or
the aliens were more intelligent than the humans were. Yes, very much so. It was
only the lack of an interstellar drive I think that had caused them to remain in
their own little section of the galaxy. Bottled up in their own solar system. Yes.
In fact it was kind of an interesting twist Quite often we read about galactic
empires, Asimov's and many others in which the well, I guess not Asimov's but others,
in which the human beings are asked whether they want to join this benevolent
galaxy wide empire and here it's the other way around. The aliens still are more
intelligent and more competent than we are but they're asking whether they can
join our empire.
This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson.